[DOCS] Add an Expectation using the GX Cloud API (#11567)
great-expectations/great_expectations: docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/manage_expectations.md

description: Create and manage Expectations in GX Cloud.
---

import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';

You can manually create Expectations via both the UI and API, and use several different GX Cloud features to generate Expectations via the UI.

This page provides instructions for working with Expectations. To learn about Expectation types and options, see the [Expectations overview](/cloud/expectations/expectations_overview.md). To learn about the Expectation changelog at the Data Asset level, visit [Manage Data Assets](/cloud/data_assets/manage_data_assets.md#view-data-asset-history).

> ## Create an Expectation

Reviewer: Thanks for updating most instances of links to the old header to point to the new anchor. There's one lingering instance of a jump link within this page that still needs to be updated

Under https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/expectations/manage_expectations#generate-sql - the link to [add a custom SQL Expectation](https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/expectations/manage_expectations#add-an-expectation) still points to `#add-an-expectation` and should be updated to point to `#create-an-expectation`

description: Create and manage Expectations in GX Cloud.
---

import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';

You can manually create Expectations via both the UI and API, and use several different GX Cloud features to generate Expectations via the UI.

This page provides instructions for working with Expectations. To learn about Expectation types and options, see the [Expectations overview](/cloud/expectations/expectations_overview.md). To learn about the Expectation changelog at the Data Asset level, visit [Manage Data Assets](/cloud/data_assets/manage_data_assets.md#view-data-asset-history).

> ## Create an Expectation

Reviewer: There are several lingering anchor links to the old `add-an-expectation` header that need to be updated to point to this new `create-an-expectation` header

See for example [Connect GX Cloud to Databricks SQL](https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/connect/connect_databrickssql#next-steps)  where the link to "Add an Expectation" points to https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/expectations/manage_expectations#add-an-expectation

Note that in this case I think it's fine to leave the link text as is. It's just the anchor in the link destination that needs to be updated

> <Tabs 
>    queryString="expectations-interface"
>    defaultValue="ui"
>    values={[
>       {value: 'ui', label: 'Create an Expectation with the UI'},
>       {value: 'api', label: 'Create an Expectation with the API'}
>    ]}
> >
> 
> <TabItem value="ui" label="UI">

Reviewer: Elsewhere, interface-based tab labels are typically just "UI" and API"

- <img width="679" height="311" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 11 12 16 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4ade3a0f-6040-49ca-bdcb-1932618e0022" />
 

- <img width="822" height="500" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 11 12 49 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/06bc3e2f-45aa-4344-a53e-fb2ecf998aa2" />

- <img width="669" height="287" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 11 12 06 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7e6323d0-99ea-4996-a032-03515f73adbe" />

I think it would be good to use the short form here, especially since these tabs are so close to the "Create an Expectation" header. The long form labels feel repetitive and harder to scan. 

<img width="687" height="290" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 11 13 15 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f0b3df17-a3b5-4e10-aa85-314149cff474" />

I see that the `TabItem`s have short form labels so maybe that was your intent, but it looks like the longer form labels from the `Tabs` config are overriding the shorter labels

```suggestion
<Tabs 
   queryString="expectations-interface"
   defaultValue="ui"
   values={[
      {value: 'ui', label: 'UI'},
      {value: 'api', label: 'API'}
   ]}
>

<TabItem value="ui" label="UI">
```

> ### Prerequisites

Reviewer: There's a [known issue](https://greatexpectations.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-915) where the table of contents on the right doesn't play nice with headers nested in tabs. Ideally, the TOC would reflect only the headers relevant to the currently selected tab(s), but it instead displays them all. In this case "Prerequisites" is duplicated since it's in both the UI tab and the API tab.

<img width="872" height="328" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 11 03 49 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/12f7e0e7-ff3f-4f54-89c8-6493ff97d071" />

iirc, 10pines looked into fixing this in code but it was going to be a disproportionately large effort for the nature of the problem, so we ended up instead adjusting headers / hiding table of contents / hiding certain levels of headers to resolve the issue on a case by case basis

In this case, I suggest removing the prerequisite headers in favor of prose introducing the lists as prerequisites since there are some other h3s on the page that it would be nice to keep in the table of contents. 

Also, the current prerequisite headers are a little odd because they also present the instructional content. In other places we often have a "Prerequisites" header for the list of prereqs and then a "Procedure" header for the instructions. 

<img width="714" height="1010" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 11 08 17 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3c7876e3-b4df-4fdd-b227-0c5b7cf2abee" />

9. Optional. Configure recurring Validations. See [Manage schedules](/docs/cloud/schedules/manage_schedules).

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="api" label="API">

You must have the following prerequisites fulfilled before creating an Expectation:

- [Python version 3.10 to 3.13](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
- [An installation of the Great Expectations Python library](https://pypi.org/project/great-expectations/).

> - [A Data Context connected to your GX Cloud organization](/cloud/connect/connect_python.md#create-a-data-context).

Reviewer: Thanks for making this list have consistent punctuation. I still think this link lands too low and should be replaced with separate links for getting and setting credentials and  a numbered step for getting the context per [this note from the first round of review](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations/pull/11567#discussion_r2743520346)

> 1. Choose an Expectation to create.

Reviewer: Thanks for removing the prereqs header in favor of prose introducing the prereqs. Now that I see it, I think it looks a bit funny to go from a bulleted list to a numbered list with no new list introduction between. 

<img width="770" height="642" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-02 at 11 36 23 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/adfa9d35-5da5-4915-a452-f001abcb5bd0" />

Here's a suggestion for a short introduction for the numbered list 

```suggestion
Follow the steps below to configure an Expectation and add it to an Expectation Suite:

1. Choose an Expectation to create.
```

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - preset expectation"
      ```

5. Create or get an Expectation Suite.

   An Expectation Suite is used to group Expectations. All Expectations need to be added to an Expectation Suite before they can be associated with a Data Asset via a Validation Definition. All of the Expectations that are grouped within an Expectation Suite will be evaluated together whenever the Validation Definition runs.

   Create an Expectation Suite and add it to your Data Context:
      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - create expectation suite"
      ```

   Optional. If you already have an API-managed Expectation Suite, get it from your Data Context:

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - get expectation suite"
      ```

6. Add the Expectation to the Expectation Suite.

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - add expectation to suite"
      ```
   
### Next Steps

>    If you have created a new Expectation Suite, you will need to associate it to a Data Asset before you can run Validations. Visit [Run Validations](/docs/cloud/validations/run_validations/#api-managed-expectations-entire-asset) to learn how to do so.

Reviewer: Thanks for resolving the issue with the duplicate "prerequisite" headers in the table of contents.

I'm now noticing that, as a result of the same root cause of tabbed headers and the TOC not playing nice together, this "Next steps" header confusingly displays when the UI tab is selected though that content variant does not have a "Next steps" section

<img width="1225" height="794" alt="Screenshot 2026-02-02 at 11 20 29 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/359f86bb-4945-4143-ad3f-3d340f7867da" />

I suggest removing this header to resolve the issue. 

Also, I still think the contents of this section are phrased in a misleading way as [noted in the first round of review](https://github.com/great-expectations/great_expectations/pull/11567#discussion_r2743238625)

Here's a suggestion to resolve both of these items

```suggestion
7.  If your Expectation Suite is not yet associated with a Data Asset through a Validation Definition, you must set up this relationship before you can validate your Expectations. Visit [Run Validations](/docs/cloud/validations/run_validations/#api-managed-expectations-entire-asset) to learn how to do so.
```

9. Optional. Configure recurring Validations. See [Manage schedules](/docs/cloud/schedules/manage_schedules).

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="api" label="API">

### Prerequisites

- [Python version 3.10 to 3.13](https://www.python.org/downloads/).
- [An installation of the Great Expectations Python library](https://pypi.org/project/great-expectations/).

> - [A Data Context connected to your GX Cloud organization](/cloud/connect/connect_python.md#create-a-data-context)

Reviewer: The other bullet points in this list end with periods

```suggestion
- [A Data Context connected to your GX Cloud organization](/cloud/connect/connect_python.md#create-a-data-context).
```

> - [A Data Context connected to your GX Cloud organization](/cloud/connect/connect_python.md#create-a-data-context)

Reviewer: The link here feels like it lands a bit low on the page. The linked section about creating a data context refers to a previous section of the linked page "The Data Context will detect the previously set environment variables and connect to your GX Cloud account." so folks may get an error if they run the code that comes before that blurb before scrolling up and getting the info on how to set the env vars. 

Most other Cloud API prereqs have separate links for getting and setting credentials and then the procedure has a numbered step for getting the context. I think this should follow that pattern for clarity and consistency

<img width="905" height="689" alt="Screenshot 2026-01-29 at 12 54 27 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4bdd783d-4103-410f-bba2-24d5cf656de2" />

examples:
- https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/data_sources/manage_data_sources?interface=api 
- https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/data_assets/manage_data_assets?interface=api
- https://deploy-preview-11567.docs.greatexpectations.io/docs/cloud/validations/run_validations?

1. Choose an Expectation to create.

>    GX comes with many built-in Expectations to cover your data quality needs. You can find a catalog of these Expectations in the [Expectation Gallery](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations/). When browsing the Expectation Gallery, you can filter the available Expectations by the data quality issue they address and by the Data Sources they support. There is also a search bar that will let you filter Expectations by matching text in their name or description.

Reviewer: The mention of "built-in" implies the existence of "custom" Expectations which aren't supported for Cloud at this time. I suggest removing this adjective for concision and to avoid that implication

To help distinguish Core and Cloud, we should avoid saying "GX" without specifying Core or Cloud unless we are referring to the company as a business entity (e.g. "The GX privacy policy can be found at ..." or "GX is a great place to work")

```suggestion
   GX Cloud comes with many Expectations to cover your data quality needs. You can find a catalog of these Expectations in the [Expectation Gallery](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations/). When browsing the Expectation Gallery, you can filter the available Expectations by the data quality issue they address and by the Data Sources they support. There is also a search bar that will let you filter Expectations by matching text in their name or description.
```

   In your code, you will find the classes for Expectations in the `expectations` module. Import the module:

   ```python title="Python"

>    from great_expectations import expectations as gxe

Reviewer: is this import necessary to include? I don't see the shorthand `gxe` anywhere else in this PR

Author: Oops, you're right, I was just so used to explicitly importing this module.

   ```

> 2. Determine the Expectation's required parameters

Reviewer: inconsistent punctuation

```suggestion
2. Determine the Expectation's required parameters.
```

   To determine the parameters your Expectation uses to evaluate data, reference the Expectation's entry in the [Expectation Gallery](https://greatexpectations.io/expectations/).  Under the **Args** section you will find a list of parameters that are necessary for the Expectation to be evaluated, along with a description of the value(s) that should be provided.

> 3. Optional. Determine the Expectation's other parameters

Reviewer: inconsistent punctuation

```suggestion
3. Optional. Determine the Expectation's other parameters.
```

   In addition to the parameters that are required for an Expectation to evaluate data, Expectations also support some optional parameters.  In the Expectations Gallery these are found under each Expectation's **Other Parameters** section.

   Examples of these parameters are:
   - `meta`: A dictionary of user-supplied metadata to store with an Expectation. This dictionary can be used to add notes about the purpose and intended use of an Expectation.
   - `mostly`: A special argument that allows for _fuzzy_ validation based on a percentage of successfully validated rows. If the percentage is at least the value set in the `mostly` parameter, the Expectation will return a `success` value of `true`.

>    - `severity`: Indicates the impact of the Expectation failing. Accepted values are `critical`, `warning`, or `info`. Defaults to `critical` if not explicitly set. You can [trigger Actions](/core/trigger_actions_based_on_results/create_a_checkpoint_with_actions.md) based on severity levels or you can condition your data pipeline with the `get_maximum_severity_failure` helper method in the [`ExpectationSuiteValidationResult` class](/reference/api/core//ExpectationSuiteValidationResult_class.mdx). Note that if an Expectation fails to execute, the failure will be recorded as critical, regardless of the Expectation configuration, to bring your attention to the fact that your data is not being tested as intended.

Reviewer: The Actions link should go to the Cloud version of the content 

```suggestion
   - `severity`: Indicates the impact of the Expectation failing. Accepted values are `critical`, `warning`, or `info`. Defaults to `critical` if not explicitly set. You can [trigger Actions](/cloud/alerts/trigger_actions.md) based on severity levels or you can condition your data pipeline with the `get_maximum_severity_failure` helper method in the [`ExpectationSuiteValidationResult` class](/reference/api/core//ExpectationSuiteValidationResult_class.mdx). Note that if an Expectation fails to execute, the failure will be recorded as critical, regardless of the Expectation configuration, to bring your attention to the fact that your data is not being tested as intended.
```

   <details>
   <summary>Restrict an Expectation to specific rows</summary>

>    To restrict an Expectation to a subset of the data retrieved in a Batch, use the `row_condition` argument. The `row_condition` argument takes a boolean expression built with Python objects. Rows will be validated for the Expectation when the `row_condition` expression evaluates to True. Conversely, if the `row_condition` evaluates to False, the corresponding row will not be validated for the Expectation.

Reviewer: the values should be styled as inline code

```suggestion
   To restrict an Expectation to a subset of the data retrieved in a Batch, use the `row_condition` argument. The `row_condition` argument takes a boolean expression built with Python objects. Rows will be validated for the Expectation when the `row_condition` expression evaluates to `True`. Conversely, if the `row_condition` evaluates to `False`, the corresponding row will not be validated for the Expectation.
```

   To support complex business use cases, logical clauses can be combined with AND / OR relationships within the `row_condition` argument.

   ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/core/customize_expectations/_examples/row_conditions.py - determine expression"
   ```

> 

Reviewer: as mentioned in the [guidance for repurposing Core content](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CpewJyk3MWbbAF9TkU4xntWqPjohlPHZL845pqWNHhw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.h0n02t9vutj3), I think it would be helpful to include the following details from the Core docs so that people can know in advance and not have to learn this the hard way

```suggestion

An Expectation can have up to 100 condition statements grouped in any number of condition blocks.

```

   Here are some examples of how to create common patterns in row conditions:

   - **A and B**.
      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/core/customize_expectations/_examples/row_conditions.py - a and b"
      ```

   - **A or B**.
      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/core/customize_expectations/_examples/row_conditions.py - a or b"
      ```

   - **(A and B) or (C and D)**.
      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/core/customize_expectations/_examples/row_conditions.py - a and b or c and d"
      ```

   - **A and (B or C)**. This pattern is not supported verbatim, but you can achieve the same result with **(A and B) or (A and C)**.
      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/core/customize_expectations/_examples/row_conditions.py - a and b or c"
      ```

   The following comparison operators are supported: `==`, `!=`, `>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, `is_in`, `is_not_in`, `is_null`, `is_not_null`. Here are some examples of using different kinds of operators:

   ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/core/customize_expectations/_examples/row_conditions.py - operators"
   ```

>    </details>

Reviewer: as mentioned in the [guidance for repurposing Core content](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CpewJyk3MWbbAF9TkU4xntWqPjohlPHZL845pqWNHhw/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.h0n02t9vutj3), I think it would be helpful to include the following details from the Core docs

```suggestion
Expectations that have different row conditions are treated as unique, even if they are of the same type, apply to the same column, and belong to the same Expectation Suite. This allows you to validate your data through multiple lenses.

Note that the following Expectations do not accept the `row_condition` argument:
- `expect_column_to_exist`
- `expect_query_results_to_match_comparison`
- `expect_table_columns_to_match_ordered_list`
- `expect_table_columns_to_match_set`
- `expect_table_column_count_to_be_between`
- `expect_table_column_count_to_equal`
- `unexpected_rows_expectation`
   </details>
```

4. Create the Expectation.
  
   Using the Expectation class you picked and the parameters you determined when referencing the Expectation Gallery, you can create your Expectation.

>    In this example, the `ExpectColumnMaxToBeBetween` Expectation is created and all of its parameters are defined in advance while leaving `strict_min` and `strict_max` as their default values:

Reviewer: The phrasing of this is potentially confusing in a couple ways
1. re: "parameters are defined in advance" I think the detail of "in advance" might be confusing since we are not yet documenting runtime parameters for Cloud
2. re: "all of its parameters" I think the detail of "all" might be confusing because some parameters that are available to the Expectation do not get set in this example

I think you could remove this paragraph or change it to something like

```suggestion
   In this example, the `ExpectColumnMaxToBeBetween` Expectation is created with a range of acceptable values that will be evaluated inclusively. 
```

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - preset expectation"
      ```

5. Create or get an Expectation Suite.

>    An Expectation Suite is used to group Expectations. All Expectations need to be added to an Expectation Suite before they can be associated to a Data Asset via a Validation Definition. All of the Expectations that are grouped with in an Expectation Suite will be evaluated together whenever you run the Validation Definition.

Reviewer: The phrasing "associated to a Data Asset" sounds a bit odd, "associated with" is the more common phrasing

"with in" should be one word

The phrasing "whenever you run the Validation Definition" is too narrow about the actor. The suite isn't user-specific, so this behavior applies no matter who runs the validation definition>

 ```suggestion
    An Expectation Suite is used to group Expectations. All Expectations need to be added to an Expectation Suite before they can be associated with a Data Asset via a Validation Definition. All of the Expectations that are grouped within an Expectation Suite will be evaluated together whenever the Validation Definition runs.
```

   Create an Expectation Suite and add it to your Data Context:
      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - create expectation suite"
      ```

>    Optional. If you already have an Expectation Suite, get it from your Data Context:

Reviewer: It may be prudent to specify "API-managed Expectation Suite" here since I think the code for adding Expectations to the GX-managed Expectation suite may be different and that might be a workflow that we don't want to promote because of ideas on the roadmap for scaling Expectations. Some more info in https://greatexpectations.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-1236

```suggestion
   Optional. If you already have an API-managed Expectation Suite, get it from your Data Context:
```

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - get expectation suite"
      ```

6. Add the Expectation to the Expectation Suite.

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - add expectation to suite"
      ```
   
   If you modify an Expectation _after_ you have added it to your Expectation Suite, you must explicitly save those modifications before they will be pushed to the Expectation Suite's configuration:

      ```python title="Python" name="docs/docusaurus/docs/cloud/expectations/examples/create_an_expectation.py - save the expectation"

>       ```

Reviewer: This feels a bit out of place here and a better fit for the instructions about editing an Expectation (when we get around to documenting the Cloud API workflow for that as tracked in https://greatexpectations.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-1168)

I suggest removing this for now

### Next Steps

>    If you have created a new Expectation Suite, you will need to associate it to a Data Asset before you can run Validations. Visit [Manage Validations](/docs/cloud/validations/run_validations/#api-managed-expectations-entire-asset) to learn how to do so.

Reviewer: The phrasing "If you have created a new Expectation Suite ..." is overly narrow. Using a pre-existing Expectation Suite does not necessarily mean that the Suite is already associated with a Data Asset. Some folks using pre-existing Expectation Suites may also need to follow this next step before they can run Validations

>    If you have created a new Expectation Suite, you will need to associate it to a Data Asset before you can run Validations. Visit [Manage Validations](/docs/cloud/validations/run_validations/#api-managed-expectations-entire-asset) to learn how to do so.

Reviewer: The linked page was renamed in the somewhat recent past

```suggestion
   If you have created a new Expectation Suite, you will need to associate it to a Data Asset before you can run Validations. Visit [Run Validations](/docs/cloud/validations/run_validations/#api-managed-expectations-entire-asset) to learn how to do so.
```
